Add configure indexes guide (#308)
pinot-contrib/pinot-docs: basics/data-import/pinot-stream-ingestion/configure-indexes.md

# Configure indexes

Learn how to apply indexes to a Pinot table. This guide assumes that you have followed the [Ingest data from Apache Kafka](/basics/data-import/pinot-stream-ingestion/import-from-apache-kafka.md) guide.

> Pinot supports a series of different indexes that can be used to optimise query performance. In this guide we'll learn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pinot supports a series of different indexes that can be used to optimize query performance. In this guide, we'll learn
```

how to add indexes to the `events` table that we set up in the [Ingest data from Apache Kafka](/basics/data-import/pinot-stream-ingestion/import-from-apache-kafka.md) guide.

### Why do we need indexes?

If no indexes are applied to the columns in a Pinot segment, the query engine needs to scan through every document,
checking whether that document meets the filter criteria provided in a query. This can be a slow process if there are a
lot of documents to scan.

When indexes are applied, the query engine can more quickly work out which documents satisfy the filter criteria,
reducing the time it takes to execute the query.

### What indexes does Pinot support?

By default, Pinot creates a forward index for every column. The forward index generally stores documents in insertion
order.

However, before flushing the segment, Pinot does a single pass over every column to see whether the data is sorted. If

> it is then Pinot instead creates a sorted (forward) index for that column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data is sorted, Pinot creates a sorted (forward) index for that column instead of the forward index.
```

<Callout>
  For real-time tables you can also explicitly tell Pinot that one of the columns should be sorted. For more details,

>   see the [Sorted Index Documentation](https://docs.pinot.apache.org/basics/indexing/forward-index#real-time-tables).

Reviewer: don't think this is a big deal for gitbook rendering, but noticed the full url in link here

</Callout>

For filtering documents within a segment, Pinot supports the following indexing techniques:

> * Inverted index - Used for exact lookups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Inverted index: Used for exact lookups.
```

> * Inverted index - Used for exact lookups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Inverted index: Used for exact lookups
```

> * Range index - Used for range queries.
> * Text index - Used for phrase, term, boolean, prefix, or regex queries.
> * Geospatial index - Based on H3, a hexagon-based hierarchical gridding. 
> Used for finding points that exist within a certain distance from another point.
> * JSON index - Used for querying columns in JSON documents.
> * Star-Tree index - Pre-aggregates results across multiple columns. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Range index: Used for range queries.
* Text index: Used for phrase, term, boolean, prefix, or regex queries.
* Geospatial index: Based on H3, a hexagon-based hierarchical gridding. 
Used for finding points that exist within a certain distance from another point.
* JSON index: Used for querying columns in JSON documents.
* Star-tree index: Pre-aggregates results across multiple columns. 
```

## View events table

> Let's see how we can apply these indexing techniques to our data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see how to apply these indexing techniques to our data.
```

To recap, the `events` table has the following fields:

| Date Time Fields       | Dimensions Fields | Metric Fields |
|----------|-------------| -------------|
| `ts` |`uuid` |     `count` |

> We might want to write queries that filter on the `ts` and `uuid` columns, so these are the columns on which we would want to configure indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To write queries that filter on the `ts` and `uuid` columns, we'd configure indexes on these columns.
```

> Since the data we're ingesting into the Kafka topic is all implicitly ordered by timestamp, this means that the `ts` column already has a sorted index.
> This means that any queries that filter on this column are already optimised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the data we're ingesting into the Kafka topic is implicitly ordered by timestamp, the `ts` column already has a sorted index. Having a sorted index means queries that filter on this column are already optimized.
```

So that leaves us with the `uuid` column.

## Add an inverted index

> We're going to add an inverted index to the `uuid` column so that queries that filter on that column will return quicker.
> We need to add the following line:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're going to add an inverted index to the `uuid` column to return queries filtered on that column quicker.
We need to add the following line:
```

## Check the index has been applied

We can check that the index has been applied to all our segments by querying Pinot's REST API.
You can find Swagger documentation at [localhost:9000/help](http://localhost:9000/help).

The following query will return the indexes defined on the `uuid` column:

```bash
curl -X GET "http://localhost:9000/segments/events/metadata?columns=uuid" \
  -H "accept: application/json" 2>/dev/null | 
  jq '.[] | [.segmentName, .indexes]'
```

##### Output

```json
[
  "events__0__1__20220214T1106Z",
  {
    "uuid": {
      "bloom-filter": "NO",
      "dictionary": "YES",
      "forward-index": "YES",
      "inverted-index": "YES",
      "null-value-vector-reader": "NO",
      "range-index": "NO",
      "json-index": "NO"
    }
  }
]
[
  "events__0__0__20220214T1053Z",
  {
    "uuid": {
      "bloom-filter": "NO",
      "dictionary": "YES",
      "forward-index": "YES",
      "inverted-index": "YES",
      "null-value-vector-reader": "NO",
      "range-index": "NO",
      "json-index": "NO"
    }
  }
]
```

We can see from looking at the `inverted-index` property that the index has been applied.

> We're using the [jq command line JSON processor](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) to extract the fields that we're interested in.

Reviewer: we might want to more this before the example

Author: done

## Querying

> You can now run some queries that filter on the `uuid` column., as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now run some queries that filter on the `uuid` column, as shown below:
```

```sql
SELECT * 
FROM events 
WHERE uuid = 'f4a4f'
LIMIT 10
```

> You'll need to change the actual `uuid` value to a value that exists in your database, since the UUIDs are generated randomly by our script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll need to change the actual `uuid` value to a value that exists in your database, because the UUIDs are generated randomly by our script.
```

## Next steps

> You've now learnt how to add an index to a real-time table and refresh all the segments so that they all recognise that index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've now learned how to add an index to a real-time table, and refresh all the segments to recognize the new index.
```

> It's probably now time to try ingesting your own dataset.
> There are [recipes](../recipes) to help you solve common problems and you can always [join the community](../../community) to get any questions answered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next up, learn how to ingest your own dataset. Check out [recipes](../recipes) designed to help you solve common problems and [join the community](../../community) to find answers to your questions.
```

Reviewer: is there a link to a tutorial on how to ingest your own dataset?

or maybe this means, by using these recipes, you'll learn "by doing" how to ingest your own data?

Author: I think it's the latter
